Docs: how to run services reliably and update service autorestart to service lifecycle. (#541)
canonical/pebble: docs/how-to/run-services-reliably.md

# How to run services reliably

> While the microservice architecture offer flexibility, they can also introduce reliability challenges such as network interruptions, resource exhaustion, problems with dependent services, cascading failures, and deployment issues. Health checks are essential for a reliable system, addressing these issues by monitoring resource usage, checking the availability of dependencies, catching problems of new deployments, and preventing downtime by redirecting traffic away from failing services.
> 
> To make the managed services more reliable, Pebble provides a comprehensive health check feature.

Reviewer: For a topic like health checks, I think this context is useful, to give some inspiration about how heath checks could be applied in practice (since we can't tell people exactly what or what not to implement). To help with readability, I recommend some edits:

```suggestion
Microservice architectures offer flexibility, but they can introduce reliability challenges such as network interruptions, resource exhaustion, problems with dependent services, cascading failures, and deployment issues. Health checks can address these issues by monitoring resource usage, checking the availability of dependencies, catching problems of new deployments, and preventing downtime by redirecting traffic away from failing services.

To help you manage services more reliably, Pebble provides a comprehensive health check feature.
```

> ## Using health checks of the HTTP type

Reviewer: Suggestion for consistency with headings in other how-tos:

```suggestion
## Use health checks of the HTTP type
```

A health check of the HTTP type issues HTTP `GET` requests to the health check URL at a user-specified interval.

The health check is considered successful if the check returns an HTTP 200 response. After getting a certain number of failures in a row, the health check is considered "down" (or unhealthy).

> ### Configuring HTTP-type health checks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure HTTP-type health checks
```

> For example, to configure a health check of HTTP type named `svc1-up` checking the endpoint `http://127.0.0.1:5000/health` at a 10-second interval with a timeout of 3 second and threshold of 3, we can use the following configuration:

Reviewer: Since we're explaining below what period, timeout, and threshold mean, I wouldn't repeat it here. How about this:

```suggestion
For example, we can configure a health check of HTTP type named `svc1-up` that checks the endpoint `http://127.0.0.1:5000/health`:
```

```yaml
checks:
    svc1-up:
        override: replace

>         period: 30s

Reviewer: Was this supposed to be 10s?

        timeout: 3s
        threshold: 3
        http:
            url: http://127.0.0.1:5000/health
```

The configuration above contains three key options that we can tweak for each health check:

- `period`: How often to run the check (defaults to 10 seconds).

> - `timeout`: If the check hasn't responded before the timeout (defaults to 3 seconds), consider the check an error
> - `threshold`: After how many consecutive errors (defaults to 3) is the check considered "down"

Reviewer: Adding periods for consistency:

```suggestion
- `timeout`: If the check hasn't responded before the timeout (defaults to 3 seconds), consider the check an error.
- `threshold`: After how many consecutive errors (defaults to 3) is the check considered "down".
```

Given the default values, a minimum check looks like the following:

```yaml
checks:
    svc1-up:
        override: replace
        http:
            url: http://127.0.0.1:5000/health
```

Besides the HTTP type, there are two more health check types in Pebble: `tcp`, which opens the given TCP port, and `exec`, which executes a user-specified command. For more information, see [Health checks](../reference/health-checks) and [Layer specification](../reference/layer-specification).

> ### Restarting the service when the health check fails

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Restart the service when the health check fails
```

To automatically restart services when a health check fails, use `on-check-failure` in the service configuration.

To restart `svc1` when the health check named `svc1-up` fails, use the following configuration:

```
services:
    svc1:
        override: replace
        command: python3 /home/ubuntu/work/health-check-sample-service/main.py
        startup: enabled
        on-check-failure:
            svc1-up: restart
```

## Limitations of health checks

> Note that although health checks are useful, they are not a complete solution for reliability and has their own limitations: Health checks can detect issues like connection to a database due to network issues, but they can't fix the network issue itself; health checks also can't replace testing and monitoring; and finally, health checks shouldn't be used for scheduling tasks like backups.

Reviewer: Suggestions for readability:

```suggestion
Although health checks are useful, they are not a complete solution for reliability:
- Health checks can detect issues such as a failed database due to network issues, but they can't fix the network issue itself.
- Health checks also can't replace testing and monitoring.
- Health checks shouldn't be used for scheduling tasks like backups.
```

## See more

- [Health checks](../reference/health-checks)
- [Layer specification](../reference/layer-specification)
- [Service lifecycle](../reference/service-lifecycle)

> - [How to manage service dependencies](service-dependencies)

Reviewer: Is it so necessary to include "How to manage service dependencies" in the list? It doesn't seem directly applicable, and it's already visible in the navigation menu.

# How to run services reliably

Microservice architectures offer flexibility, but they can introduce reliability challenges such as network interruptions, resource exhaustion, problems with dependent services, cascading failures, and deployment issues. Health checks can address these issues by monitoring resource usage, checking the availability of dependencies, catching problems with new deployments, and preventing downtime by redirecting traffic away from failing services.

To help you manage services more reliably, Pebble provides a health check feature.

## Use HTTP health checks

A health check of `http` type issues HTTP `GET` requests to the health check URL at a user-specified interval.

> The health check is considered successful if the URL returns any HTTP 2xx response. After getting a certain number of failures in a row, the health check is considered "down" (or unhealthy).

Reviewer: A small thing, but I think we should change "failures" to "errors", to match the term used in the bullet points about `timeout` and `threshold`. Later in the doc we use "failure" to mean the check is down, so it could be confusing to use it here with a different meaning.

```suggestion
The health check is considered successful if the URL returns any HTTP 2xx response. After getting a certain number of errors in a row, the health check is considered "down" (or unhealthy).
```

For example, we can configure a health check of type `http` named `svc1-up` that checks the endpoint `http://127.0.0.1:5000/health`:

```yaml
checks:
  svc1-up:
    override: replace
    period: 5s    # default 10s
    timeout: 1s   # default 3s
    threshold: 5  # default 3
    http:
      url: http://127.0.0.1:5000/health
```

The configuration above contains three key options that we can tweak for each health check:

- `period`: How often to run the check.
- `timeout`: If the check hasn't responded before the timeout, consider the check an error.

> - `threshold`: After this many consecutive errors the check considered "down".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `threshold`: After this many consecutive errors, the check is considered "down".
```

```yaml
checks:
  svc1-up:
    override: replace
    http:
      url: http://127.0.0.1:5000/health
```

Besides the `http` type, there are two more health check types in Pebble: `tcp`, which opens the given TCP port, and `exec`, which executes a user-specified command. For more information, see [Health checks](../reference/health-checks) and [Layer specification](../reference/layer-specification).

## Restart a service when the health check fails

To automatically restart services when a health check fails, use `on-check-failure` in the service configuration.

To restart `svc1` when the health check named `svc1-up` fails, use the following configuration:

```yaml
services:
  svc1:
    override: replace
    command: python3 /home/ubuntu/work/health-check-sample-service/main.py
    startup: enabled
    on-check-failure:
      svc1-up: restart
```

## Limitations of health checks

Although health checks are useful, they are not a complete solution for reliability:

- Health checks can detect issues such as a failed database connection due to network issues, but they can't fix the network issue itself.
- Health checks also can't replace testing and monitoring.

> - Health checks shouldn't be used for scheduling tasks like backups. Use a cron-style tool for that.

Reviewer: Very minor, but I'd recommend "such as" instead of "like":

```suggestion
- Health checks shouldn't be used for scheduling tasks such as backups. Use a cron-style tool for that.
```

# How to run services reliably

Microservice architectures offer flexibility, but they can introduce reliability challenges such as network interruptions, resource exhaustion, problems with dependent services, cascading failures, and deployment issues. Health checks can address these issues by monitoring resource usage, checking the availability of dependencies, catching problems of new deployments, and preventing downtime by redirecting traffic away from failing services.

To help you manage services more reliably, Pebble provides a comprehensive health check feature.

## Use health checks of the HTTP type

A health check of the HTTP type issues HTTP `GET` requests to the health check URL at a user-specified interval.

> The health check is considered successful if the check returns an HTTP 200 response. After getting a certain number of failures in a row, the health check is considered "down" (or unhealthy).

Reviewer 2: This is actually 2xx (see also [this minor issue I just fixed](https://github.com/canonical/pebble/pull/565)).
```suggestion
The health check is considered successful if the URL returns any HTTP 2xx response. After getting a certain number of failures in a row, the health check is considered "down" (or unhealthy).
```

> ### Configure HTTP-type health checks

Reviewer 2: I don't think this heading adds anything. I reckon we should drop it.

> For example, we can configure a health check of HTTP type named `svc1-up` that checks the endpoint `http://127.0.0.1:5000/health`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, we can configure a health check of type `http` named `svc1-up` that checks the endpoint `http://127.0.0.1:5000/health`:
```

```yaml
checks:
  svc1-up:
    override: replace

>     period: 10s
>     timeout: 3s
>     threshold: 3

Reviewer 2: It seems odd to specify these if we set them to the defaults. You already mention the defaults below. How about this:

```suggestion
    period: 5s    # default 10s
    timeout: 1s   # default 3s
    threshold: 5  # default 3
```

    http:
      url: http://127.0.0.1:5000/health
```

The configuration above contains three key options that we can tweak for each health check:

- `period`: How often to run the check (defaults to 10 seconds).

> - `timeout`: If the check hasn't responded before the timeout (defaults to 3 seconds), consider the check an error.

Reviewer 2: I think this reads a bit oddly with the parenthesized default in the middle:
```suggestion
- `timeout`: If the check hasn't responded before the timeout, consider the check an error (defaults to 3 seconds).
```

Reviewer 2: Or we could just drop these, if we add the `# default 10s` style comments in the YAML above.

Author: A comment in the first example is probably more than enough. I will add comments and drop this list.

> - `threshold`: After how many consecutive errors (defaults to 3) is the check considered "down".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `threshold`: After this many consecutive errors the check considered "down"  (defaults to 3).
```

> Given the default values, a minimum check looks like the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we're happy with the default values, a minimum check looks like the following:
```

```yaml
checks:
  svc1-up:
    override: replace
    http:
      url: http://127.0.0.1:5000/health
```

> Besides the HTTP type, there are two more health check types in Pebble: `tcp`, which opens the given TCP port, and `exec`, which executes a user-specified command. For more information, see [Health checks](../reference/health-checks) and [Layer specification](../reference/layer-specification).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Besides the `http` type, there are two more health check types in Pebble: `tcp`, which opens the given TCP port, and `exec`, which executes a user-specified command. For more information, see [Health checks](../reference/health-checks) and [Layer specification](../reference/layer-specification).
```

> ### Restart the service when the health check fails

Reviewer 2: Because this applies to any check type, I think this should be a H2 header:
```suggestion
## Restart a service when the health check fails
```

To automatically restart services when a health check fails, use `on-check-failure` in the service configuration.

To restart `svc1` when the health check named `svc1-up` fails, use the following configuration:

```yaml
services:
  svc1:
    override: replace
    command: python3 /home/ubuntu/work/health-check-sample-service/main.py
    startup: enabled
    on-check-failure:
      svc1-up: restart
```

## Limitations of health checks

Although health checks are useful, they are not a complete solution for reliability:

- Health checks can detect issues such as a failed database connection due to network issues, but they can't fix the network issue itself.
- Health checks also can't replace testing and monitoring.

> - Health checks shouldn't be used for scheduling tasks like backups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Health checks shouldn't be used for scheduling tasks like backups. Use a cron-style tool for that.
```

Health checks can monitor resource usage (CPU, memory, disk space) within a microservice. For example, if resource consumption exceeds predefined thresholds, the health check can signal an unhealthy state, allowing for remediation, for example, scaling up or scaling out the service, restarting it, or issuing alerts.

### Identify dependent service failures

Health checks can verify the availability of critical dependencies. A service's health check can include checks to ensure it can connect to its database, message queues, or other required services.

### Catch deployment issues

Health checks can be incorporated into the deployment process. After a new version of a service is deployed, the deployment pipeline can monitor its health status. If the health check fails, the deployment can be rolled back to the previous state, preventing a faulty version from affecting end users.

### Mitigate cascading failures

By quickly identifying unhealthy services, health checks can help prevent cascading failures. For example, load balancers and service discovery mechanisms can use health check information to route traffic away from failing services, giving them time to recover.

> ### More on health checks

Reviewer: I'd recommend breaking this out as a separate section and moving it to the end of the doc. We could call it "Limitations of health checks"
